Neptune's new buddy. This is a story
that's hit the news recently because of
another very interesting paper that's
been published and it's the discovery of
an object called 2020 VN40. I'm afraid
it doesn't have a sensible name yet.
This was discovered in 2020, hence the
catalog number by the Canada France
Hawaii telescope over there in Hawaii.
um initially discovered in 2020 but only
reported in 2025
having taken over six years worth of
data and that was in order to ascertain
the orbit of this object. It's around
about a 90 kilometer diameter space
rock. So fairly modest in size and
that's estimated just based on the
telescopic observation of it of its
brightness and assuming a typical amount
of light reflected from it. Its albido
of around 9% so fairly dark in color. If
it's much brighter it would be smaller.
If it was much darker then perhaps it
will be bigger. And more data is needed
to really pin that down. This is after
all a long way from the sun. The average
distance is around 140 times the earth's
sun distance. Neptune orbits at around
uh the 30 astronomical unit AU mark. So
this is deep in the outer part of the
solar system. There's this lovely
diagram of its orbit which was generated
by the authors of the paper and we can
see the orbit of the planets and then
the orange region that's the Kiper belt
where Pluto is and where there are a lot
of objects essentially a a second
asteroid belt of leftover worlds that
never really got together to form a
large planet. Probably that's a part of
the story. Um, and the yellow track is
this object VN40 in a long elliptical
orbit that dives deep into the uh Kiper
belt area and back out again. In fact,
we describe such objects as being
scattered disc objects. So beyond the
Kiper belt, the next region is called
the scattered disc. And the parameters
for this one at perihelion 38.26
astronomical units. So that's uh quite
close, but not quite as close as your
typical distance for Pluto.
And going all the way out to 241.7.
So the orbit's known pretty accurately
and takes 1,655
years to go around. A very, very long
time. But astonishingly, that is exactly
10 times the orbital period of Neptune,
165 1/2 years. and the two are in lock
step. They're in what's called a orbital
resonance.
Now, we've caught it such that in 20
years time it will be coming into the
perihelion, the next close approach. Um
it's no surprise we tend to catch things
when they're nearest because the
brightness of them drops off so
dramatically with distance from the sun.
So, the orbit is interesting. Many
orbits have a a relationship with that
of Neptune in the outer solar system.
And Pluto is perhaps the best example.
It's in a 3:2 relationship. Neptune does
three orbits for every two orbits that
Pluto does. And even though Pluto's
orbit is more elliptical and crosses
within the distance that Neptune has,
then they don't collide. And they don't
collide because they are always in this
lockstep relationship. When Pluto
crossed from the exterior to interior
point in 1979 shown there on the
diagram, Neptune was at the other
crossing point. So a fairly substantial
distance away. And by the time Pluto got
to crossing the orbit again in 1999,
Neptune had moved ahead and was probably
even further ahead by then. And they
just never quite end up in the same
region of the orbit. This also
stabilizes Pluto's orbit because every
time it reaches the perihelion point,
Neptune is either on one side of the
orbit or the other and they alternate.
So the kicks it gets from Neptune
because of this one and a half to one
relationship
cancel out in the long run. And so Pluto
gets a kick one way and then a kick the
other way. But in this case,
VN40's orbit crosses that of Neptune
when viewed in a plan view like this,
and it's in a 10:1 orbit.
But there's still no chance of it
colliding. And the reason for that is
that you need to look at things in 3D.
The orbit of VN40 is quite substantially
tilted compared to the plane of the
solar system. And that's not uncommon.
Pluto's orbits also a bit tilted, but
the scattered disc objects are really at
quite wild angles. And that orbital
inclination keeps it away from Neptune,
away from any risk of collision. But
it's also the case that Neptune gives
this a slingshot with its gravity. As
the two of them pass through the region
of intersection,
it's going to give a pull to
uh VN40
down towards Neptune as the object is
descending down towards the crossing
point and then slow it down again as it
moves away and as Neptune swings
underneath. And overall, these
alternating pulls are canceling out and
creating this stable resonance that's
going to keep this object in orbit for
tens of millions of years. So, a
relatively long time for an orbit that's
coming rather close to a giant planet.
Now, the other thing that was announced
very recently was the detection of this
object shown with the purple ring around
it to help you pull it out of the noise
there. This is called Ammonite. It's a
potential dwarf planet out beyond Pluto.
Catalog number 2023 for the year of
discovery, KU14.
And so, what do we know about this?
Well, it's somewhere again estimated
from its brightness in the range 220 to
380 km in diameter. So that's
potentially big enough for it to turn
itself into a round spherical shape.
Gravity of a mass of this size should be
enough to overcome the physical
resistance of the rocks and ices and
pull it into a sphere. And that is a
criteria for counting something as a
dwarf planet. So maybe we'll be having a
new dwarf planet u once this is all
fully confirmed. Ammonite.
It's actually slightly larger in all
probability than Vesta, the asteroid in
the inner part of the solar system,
which just fails the criteria because
it's a bit off round at about 250
kilometers. So if this is at the larger
end, I think it's got a chance. And if
it's at the lower end, maybe it won't
quite make the grade.
But this is also in the scattered disc
in an orbit that we sometimes refer to
as the Sednoid region. So we have the
asteroid Sednner, which was the first
member of this class of objects that
don't really come into the region of the
Kiper belt. And this is no exception.
And it goes from 66 to 252
astronomical units shown in that red
orbit there. And we've got some of the
other
sedoids marked there. Just three of
them. There are lots more now. And these
are
interesting because they're all on one
side of the solar system with their
close approach to the sun almost in the
same region. And this was thought to be
evidence that maybe planet 9 was out
there corelling them into these orbits
and leaving the other side of the solar
system essentially free of these objects
due to gravitational interactions. But
ammonite 2023 KQ14
seems to be breaking the mold and
perhaps calls into question the whole
idea of the uh presence of there being a
significant large outer planet, planet
9. And so I'll leave you with this
lovely picture of Neptune, the outermost
of the major planets. And I hope you've
enjoyed that little story.